ARROW-17909: [Website] Arrow and Parquet Part 2: Nested and Hierarchal Data using Structs and Lists (#246)
apache/arrow-site: _posts/2022-10-01-arrow-parquet-encoding-part-2.md

             │ "c.c1"    │                  │"d.d1"    ││ "d.d2"           │ │
│            │ Primitive │  │ │             │Primitive ││ PrimitiveArray   │
             │ Array     │                  │Array     ││                  │ │
│            └───────────┘  │ │             └──────────┘└──────────────────┘
     "c"                           "d"                                       │
│    StructArray            │ │    StructArray
 ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─   ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘
 ```

### Definition Levels
Unlike Arrow, Parquet does not encode validity in a structured fashion, instead only storing definition levels for each of the primitive columns, i.e. those that aren’t groups. The definition level of a given element, is the depth in the schema at which it is fully defined.

For example consider the case of d.d2, which contains two nullable levels d and d2.

A definition level of 0 would imply a null at the level of d:

```json
{
}
```

A definition level of 1 would imply a null at the level of d.d2

```json
{
  d: { .. }
}
```

A definition level of 2 would imply a defined value for d.d2:

```json
{
  d: { d2: .. }
}
```

> Goin back to the JSON documents above, this format could be stored in this parquet schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Going back to the JSON documents above, this format could be stored in this parquet schema
```

│    ├─────┤   ├─────┤    │ ├─────┤   ├─────┤│
     │  1  │   │  1  │    │ │  1  │   │  2  ││ │
│    ├─────┤   ├─────┤    │ └─────┘   └─────┘│
     │  1  │   │  1  │    │ Validity   Values│ │
│    └─────┘   ├─────┤    │                  │
               │  3  │    │ child[0]         │ │
│    Validity  └─────┘    │ PrimitiveArray   │
                          │                  │ │
│              Offsets    └──────────────────┘
     "a"                                       │
│    ListArray
 ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘
```

### Repetition Levels

In order to encode lists, Parquet stores an integer *repetition level* in addition to a definition level. A repetition level identifies where in the hierarchy of repeated fields the current value is to be inserted. A value of 0 would imply a new list in the top-most repeated field, a value of 1 a new element within the top-most repeated field, a value of 2 a new element within the second top-most repeated field, and so on.

Each repeated field also has a corresponding definition level, however, in this case rather than indicating a null value, they indicate an empty array.

```text

> ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐

Author: @tustvold  -- can you review this one again? I added a new empty list to the example as you suggested (so now the example has 4 documents rather than 3). I am not sure about the repetition levels

Reviewer 2: I will review this first thing tomorrow

Reviewer 2: I will review this first thing tomorrow

Author: @tustvold  I don't think this example is correct (I think I mis translated it / mashed it up incorrectly). Among other issues, it has 5 values in definition/repetition levels but there are only 4 documents 🤔

---
layout: post
title: "Arrow and Parquet Part 2: Nested and Hierarchal Data using Structs and Lists"
date: "2022-10-01 00:00:00"
author: "tustvold and alamb"
categories: [parquet, arrow]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

## Introduction

> This is the second, in a three part series exploring how projects such as [Rust Apache Arrow](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs) support conversion between [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/) for in memory processing and [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) for efficient storage. The fist post <!-- todo add link when published --> covers the basics of data storage and validity encoding, and this post covers `Struct` and `List` types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the second, in a three part series exploring how projects such as [Rust Apache Arrow](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs) support conversion between [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/) and [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/). The [first post](https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2022/10/05/arrow-parquet-encoding-part-1/) covered the basics of data storage and validity encoding, and this post will cover the more complex `Struct` and `List` types.
```

I don't think the qualifications are necessary given the following paragraph, and they make it harder to read

[Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/) is an open, language-independent columnar memory format for flat and hierarchical data, organized for efficient analytic operations. [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) is an open, column-oriented data file format designed for very efficient data encoding and retrieval.

## Struct / Group Columns

Both Parquet and Arrow have the concept of a *struct* column, which is a column containing one or more other columns in named fields and is analogous to a JSON object.

For example, consider the following three JSON documents

```json
{              <-- First record
  "a": 1,      <-- the top level fields are a, b, c, and d

>   "b": {
>     "b1": 1,   <-- b1 and b2 are "nested" fields of "b"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  "b": {       <-- b is always provided (not nullable)
    "b1": 1,   <-- b1 and b2 are "nested" fields of "b"
```

>     "b2": 3    <-- b2 is always provided (not null)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "b2": 3    <-- b2 is always provided (not nullable)
```

   },
 "d": {
   "d1":  1    <-- d1 is a "nested" field of "d"
  }
}
```
```json
{              <-- Second record
  "a": 2,
  "b": {
    "b2": 4    <-- note "b1" is NULL in this record
  },
  "c": {       <-- note "c" was NULL in the first record

>     "c1": 6        but when "c" is provided, c1 is also always provided

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "c1": 6        but when "c" is provided, c1 is also always provided (not nullable)
```

    │  1  │  │ │  6  │   │        │  1  │   ││  2  │   ││ │  1  │   │  1  ││ │
│   ├─────┤  │ ├─────┤   │  │ │   ├─────┤   │├─────┤   ││ ├─────┤   ├─────┤│
    │  1  │  │ │  7  │   │        │  0  │   ││ ??  │   ││ │ ??  │   │ ??  ││ │
│   └─────┘  │ └─────┘   │  │ │   └─────┘   │└─────┘   ││ └─────┘   └─────┘│
    Validity │  Values   │        Validity  │ Values   ││ Validity   Values│ │
│            │           │  │ │             │          ││                  │
             │ "c.c1"    │                  │"d.d1"    ││ "d.d2"           │ │
│            │ Primitive │  │ │             │Primitive ││ PrimitiveArray   │
             │ Array     │                  │Array     ││                  │ │
│            └───────────┘  │ │             └──────────┘└──────────────────┘
     "c"                           "d"                                       │
│    StructArray            │ │    StructArray
 ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─   ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘
 ```

More technical detail is available in the [StructArray format specification](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#struct-layout).

### Definition Levels

> Unlike Arrow, Parquet does not encode validity in a structured fashion, instead only storing definition levels for each of the primitive columns, i.e. those that aren’t groups. The definition level of a given element, is the depth in the schema at which it is fully defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike Arrow, Parquet does not encode validity in a structured fashion, instead only storing definition levels for each of the primitive columns, i.e. those that don't contain other columns. The definition level of a given element, is the depth in the schema at which it is fully defined.
```

Given we haven't shown a group yet :sweat_smile:

For example consider the case of `d.d2`, which contains two nullable levels `d` and `d2`.

A definition level of `0` would imply a null at the level of `d`:

```json
{
}
```

> A definition level of `1` would imply a null at the level of `d.d2`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A definition level of `1` would imply a null at the level of `d`
```

  │    Levels            │ │   │    Levels            │ │   Levels             │  │
│ │                      │   │ │                      │ │                      │
  │  "c.1"               │ │   │  "d.1"               │ │  "d.d2"              │  │
│ └──────────────────────┘   │ └──────────────────────┘ └──────────────────────┘
     "c"                   │      "d"                                             │
└ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─  └ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─
 ```

## List / Repeated Columns

Closing out support for nested types are *lists*, which containing a variable number of other values. For example,

```json
{                     <-- First record
  "a": [1],           <-- top-level field a containing list of integers
}
```
```json
{                     <-- "a" is not provided (is null)
}
```
```json
{                     <-- "a" is non-null but empty
  "a": []
}
```
```json
{
  "a": [null, 2],     <-- list elements can themselves be null
}
```

Documents of this format could be stored in this Arrow schema

```text
Field(name: "a", nullable: true, datatype: List(
  Field(name: "element", nullable: true, datatype: Int32),
)
```

> Documents of this format could be stored in this Parquet schema

Reviewer 2: I would move this down to the parquet section, same as was done for the section above

```text
message schema {
  optional group a (LIST) {
    repeated group list {
      optional int32 element;
    }
  }
}
```

> As before, Arrow chooses to represent this in a hierarchical fashion with a list of monotonically increasing integers called *offsets* in a `ListArray`, and stores all the values that appear in the lists in a single child array. Each consecutive pair of elements in this offset array identifies a slice of the child array for that array index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As before, Arrow chooses to represent this in a hierarchical fashion as a ListArray. This contains a list of monotonically increasing integers called *offsets*, a validity mask if the list is nullable, and a child array containing the list elements. Each consecutive pair of elements in the offset array identifies a slice of the child array for that index in the ListArray
```

> For example, the list of offsets `[0, 2, 3, 3]` contains 3 pairs of offsets, `(0,2)`, `(2,3)`, and `(3,3)`, and is therefore a ListArray of length 3 with the following values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, a list with offsets `[0, 2, 3, 3]` contains 3 pairs of offsets, `(0,2)`, `(2,3)`, and `(3,3)`, and is therefore a ListArray of length 3 with the following values:
```

│              Offsets    └──────────────────┘
     "a"                                       │
│    ListArray
 ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘
```

More technical detail is available in the [ListArray format specification](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#variable-size-list-layout).

### Repetition Levels

In order to encode lists, Parquet stores an integer *repetition level* in addition to a definition level. A repetition level identifies where in the hierarchy of repeated fields the current value is to be inserted. A value of `0` would imply a new list in the top-most repeated field, a value of 1 a new element within the top-most repeated field, a value of 2 a new element within the second top-most repeated field, and so on.

Each repeated field also has a corresponding definition level, however, in this case rather than indicating a null value, they indicate an empty array.

```text
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│  ┌─────┐      ┌─────┐               │
│  │  3  │      │  0  │               │
│  ├─────┤      ├─────┤               │
│  │  0  │      │  0  │               │
│  ├─────┤      ├─────┤      ┌─────┐  │

> │  │  1  │      │  1  │      │  1  │  │

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
│  │  1  │      │  0  │      │  1  │  │
```
A sanity check you can do is that a repetition level of 0 indicates the start of a new row, therefore the number of zeros must match the number of rows

  ┌──────────────────────┐      ┌──────────────────────┐┌──────────────────┐ │
│ │ ┌─────┐    ┌─────┐   │  │ │ │  ┌─────┐   ┌─────┐   ││ ┌─────┐   ┌─────┐│
  │ │  0  │    │ ??  │   │      │  │  1  │   │  1  │   ││ │  0  │   │ ??  ││ │
│ │ ├─────┤    ├─────┤   │  │ │ │  ├─────┤   ├─────┤   ││ ├─────┤   ├─────┤│
  │ │  1  │    │  6  │   │      │  │  1  │   │  2  │   ││ │  1  │   │  1  ││ │
│ │ ├─────┤    ├─────┤   │  │ │ │  ├─────┤   ├─────┤   ││ ├─────┤   ├─────┤│
  │ │  1  │    │  7  │   │      │  │  0  │   │ ??  │   ││ │ ??  │   │ ??  ││ │
│ │ └─────┘    └─────┘   │  │ │ │  └─────┘   └─────┘   ││ └─────┘   └─────┘│
  │ Validity    Values   │      │  Validity   Values   ││ Validity   Values│ │
│ │                      │  │ │ │                      ││                  │
  │            "c.c1"    │      │            "d.d1"    ││ "d.d2"           │ │
│ │            Primitive │  │ │ │            Primitive ││ PrimitiveArray   │
  │            Array     │      │            Array     ││                  │ │
│ └──────────────────────┘  │ │ └──────────────────────┘└──────────────────┘
     "c"                           "d"                                       │

> │    StructArray            │ │    StructArray

Author: done -- can you give it a look?

  │  │  0  │    │  6  │  │ │   │  │  1  │    │  1  │  │ │ │  1  │     │  1  │  │  │
│ │  ├─────┤    ├─────┤  │   │ │  ├─────┤    ├─────┤  │ │ ├─────┤     └─────┘  │
  │  │  1  │    │  7  │  │ │   │  │  1  │    │  2  │  │ │ │  2  │              │  │
│ │  ├─────┤    └─────┘  │   │ │  ├─────┤    └─────┘  │ │ ├─────┤              │
  │  │  1  │             │ │   │  │  0  │             │ │ │  0  │              │  │
│ │  └─────┘             │   │ │  └─────┘             │ │ └─────┘              │
  │                      │ │   │                      │ │                      │  │
│ │  Definition   Data   │   │ │  Definition   Data   │ │ Definition   Data    │
  │    Levels            │ │   │    Levels            │ │   Levels             │  │
│ │                      │   │ │                      │ │                      │
  │  "c.1"               │ │   │  "d.1"               │ │  "d.d2"              │  │
│ └──────────────────────┘   │ └──────────────────────┘ └──────────────────────┘
     "c"                   │      "d"                                             │
└ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─  └ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─
```

> ## List / Repeated Columns

Author: Added in 672d09b611

     │  1  │   │  1  │    │ │  0  │   │ ??  ││ │
│    └─────┘   ├─────┤    │ └─────┘   └─────┘│
     Validity  │  3  │    │ Validity   Values│ │
│              └─────┘    │                  │
                          │ child[0]         │ │
│                         │ PrimitiveArray   │
               Offsets    │                  │ │
│                         └──────────────────┘
     "a"                                       │
│    ListArray
 ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘
```

### Repetition Levels

In order to encode lists, Parquet stores an integer *repetition level* in addition to a definition level. A repetition level identifies where in the hierarchy of repeated fields the current value is to be inserted. A value of 0 would imply a new list in the top-most repeated field, a value of 1 a new element within the top-most repeated field, a value of 2 a new element within the second top-most repeated field, and so on.

Each repeated field also has a corresponding definition level, however, in this case rather than indicating a null value, they indicate an empty array.

```text
a:
  Data Page:
    Repetition Levels: encode([0, 0, 0, 1])

>     Definition Levels: encode([3, 0, 2, 2])

Author: I am not sure this definition level is correct for this example
